---
title: Freedom Was Never Enough
description: black-and-white ethics is willfully color-blind
---

Early open-source software stalwarts made the big stage by thumping hard on a single value: freedom.  We're all born free to compute as we please, and computer programmers shouldn't stop us with "intellectual property".  But apart from a few cerebral zealots, almost nobody's real-world morality boils down to just "Can folks do what they wanna?"  What's right just ain't so black-and-white.

We care about those near to us.  We care about loyalty, respect, and fairness.  We care about connections to higher things and purposes.  We seek a balance of those concerns when they conflict with each other and with freedom, as we see they often do.

As more and people get involved, collaboratively and socially, values conflicts are gushing out of open source.  Software Freedom absolutism is black-and-white, while the world, as usual, is defiantly Technicolor.

Black-and-white software freedom enables users, even encourages them, to disregard or abuse the people behind the software they use.  We've seen developers browbeaten into slapping an MIT license on their work not for their benefit, for the benefit of those beating brow.  We've seen bug reports demanding small features and fixes reeking of entitlement … and nary a whiff of thanks.

Black-and-white software freedom enables competitors to unfairly snatch the moneymaking potential of other developers' work right out of their hands.  We've seen developers sacrifice to keep pace with a growing, popular creation, only to find they're outcompeted by runaway incumbents wherever they turn for an honest buck: documentation, support, training, consulting, hosting, even swag.  We've seen those incumbents work, consciously and by natural opinion selection, to thump on the freedom that plays into the their advantages, or expand the meaning of "open" to like effect.

Black-and-white software freedom enables powerful newcomers to undermine the leadership of long-serving creators and maintainers. We've seen developers booted from leadership positions by new-user people, marginalized and threatened by hostile forks from consortia of household names, and cloned by their pricey staff and consultant engineers.  We've seen the notion of practical credit for one's work fall from respected license condition to broadly ignored administrative chore to ["proprietary" mortal sin](https://www.theregister.co.uk/2007/07/27/osi_fury_badgerware/).

Black-and-white software freedom enables takers to turn makers' work against the very things they hold dear.  We've seen web tech turned into ad tech, computer vision into [surveillance](https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/24/movidius-brings-its-computer-vision-tech-to-the-worlds-largest-security-camera-maker/), and cryptographic systems into [boiler-room](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boiler_room_(business)) [scams](https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2017-219).  We've seen it all compiled, debugged, and deployed using copyleft tools that left us with nary a line of new source code.

When software-freedom absolutism manages to do some good in any of these other moral dimensions, the true believer happily credits to the cause.  But when software-freedom takes a toll of these types, the faithful blame the victim---You shouldn't have done open source like we told you to!---or simply write the damage off as acceptable collateral of freedom.

Black-and-white software freedom, like any black-and-white ethics, trades completeness and messy realism for expedience and clean clarity.  As usual, that's a bum moral deal.  Just as computer programming often reduces a complex problem down to a computable approximation, errors be damned, ethical conversations trapped within software, which only step outside programming to grab vague positives like "freedom" and "community", derive a neatly computable ethics for a bad approximation of life.

The results in application are often disastrous.  Just as software reductionism looses evil systems on the world, having passed full lab muster, moral reductionism makes wanton moral automata of otherwise capable consciences, blinded or made indifferent to meaningful consequences.  The comfort of sound theory, of easy certainty, must be preserved.  Morality _must_ be reduced to Turing-esque, discrete deductive reasoning, because the goal is to please those computing the right moral answers, not those being computed on.

In American politics, we see a similarly reactive interplay of values systems.  Those shocked or directly oppressed by abusive structures of authority, influence, and religion work out their frustrations by thumping hard on justice and compassion, denying, more or less, that authority, influence, or religion has anything to offer anyone but their elects.  Others come to vilify a single, identifiable font of all worldly oppression, like the government, big business, the Illuminati, or with ineffable, utterly dermoralizing persistence, the Jews.  All of those formative experiences are real, and all the lessons taken from them genuine, however objectively bunk.  But the result is an unworkable politics of shouting extremes, at the expense of more holistic, realistic, the-world-is-complicated approaches that don't fit any black-and-white narrative.

Software is at best just a microcosm.  Early programmers felt oppressed and abused by [companies' use of nondisclosure agreements and copyright licenses](https://www.oreilly.com/openbook/freedom/ch01.html), and learned a knee-jerk liberty-liberalism by [Skinnerian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operant_conditioning) experience.  They vilified, and made common cause with those who vilified, the single culprit of intellectual property law, symbolic source of all evil they abhorred.  RMS made a clever deal with that devil, for copyleft, but it worked out like deals with devils do, clever or not.

Now a new generation of programmers feels oppressed and abused _by companies' use of open source_.  They are learning a knee-jerk reflex against it, despite aspects they value very highly, which often brought them into software in the first place.  They are learning that doing as open source orthodoxy prescribes, in the best case, can mean getting drawn between a runaway project that they just can't put down and an industry primed to scout, seize, and strip-mine all life-financing value from up-and-coming projects, leveraging teams, talent, brand recognition, and network effects wee Shire folk can hardly hope to match.  When developers protest, they learn that the blessed "ethical" option is to join that system as an employee, or else face down bully brigades of moral condemnation for having objected to what seems to them obviously wrong.  O'Reilly.  Red Hat.  Now Amazon.  Next some new billion-dollar network-effect-lotto winner.  Not you.  You can at best form an also-ran, rounding-error niche player that the runaway winner will be glad to cite as evidence that they are not, in fact, a monopoly in need of a trust busting.

People like me have to care about business models.  Nearly everyone we're supposed to advise has to care about money.  I can answer the license questions all day, but I can't do that right by ignoring why they're being asked in the first place.

The trick is finding models that:

1.  Don't encourage bad or crippled work product.  Any model that contends for nearly all developer time is out.

2.  Work for single developers and small teams, as well as companies.  Models that require teams of lawyers, salespeople, or separate open and closed developers are out.

3.  Potentially make meaningful money for as many people.  Swag doesn't cut it.

4.  Don't leave them vulnerable to big incumbents with overwhelming structural advantages.  Support and shoting are out, without propreitary code, infrastructure, or tooling, all crippled-product problems.

5.  Don't produce the kinds of network effects that birth big incumbents with overwhelming structural advantages in the first place.

In simplified terms, we're looking for models that scale up, scale down, encourage good code, and send the money back where the code came from.  In value terms, we want _both_ free and fair, where free is the only paved path right now.

The original free software business model, payment for copies of software, was fair in free software's formative years.  RMS's nascent Free Software Foundation sold dead-tree manuals and copies of Emacs on tape, which as far as I can tell was all that held him back from going full anti-commerce right out of the gate.  But the same massive cost shift that made freedom matter so much and to so many---cheap Internet distribution---also gutted distribution as a model.  By then, FSF had won the donations-model lotto.

As I have [mapped out systematically before](https://blog.licensezero.com/2018/10/17/mapping-models.html#purebred-models-overview), that leaves dual licensing (AKA selling exceptions, AKA public-private licensing) and [delayed release](https://blog.sentry.io/2019/11/06/relicensing-sentry/), which usually functions as a subspecies of dual licensing with some licensing choices precommitted on a schedule.  All these models rely on the developer, their company, or now their [license-based collaborative](https://xlcollaborative.com/) wielding unique power to ignore the terms of their own public license and offer different terms at a price.

From a broad, multifaceted moral perspective, that kind of unilateral power is resolutely positive.  The maker or makers of a project _are_ special with respect to their own work.  They deserve special power to reenforce the special bindings of maker to work and work to maker that we know in more general terms as "fairness", "authority", "merit", "credit" and so on---the missing moral dimensions of the stilted freedom-only view.  When someone other than the maker profits from their work at their expense, that's unfair.  And so forth.

But giving one developer or group---the one that happened to have made the software---special license frustrates those whose goal is to usurp those special connections to the work.  If you want to move in and outcompete the maker on paid distribution, you can't have them keeping distribution rights or build tooling to themselves.  So projects that do "aren't real open source", we're told, even with core code free for all to read and use.  If you want to outcompete the maker on support and maintenance services, you can't have them controlling access to documentation or gatekeeping governance.  So projects that do "aren't real open source", as we sometimes hear about Clojure, the foundation of a sprawling, healthy, [shockingly mature](https://www.clojuriststogether.org/) collaborative community.  If you want to outcompete the maker on hosting, you can't have them requiring you to release your proprietary hosting stack.  So projects that do "aren't real open source", as we heard about MongoDB's Server Side Public License.

I don't for a minute think that everyone who holds an extended or stringent view of "open source" schemes to screw maintainers.  There are other, valid reasons, moral and intellectual, to support each of those positions.  But reading history written by commercial winners, and bearing in mind their enormous powers of marketing, recruiting, and lobbying those firms wiled, it's no surprise that "open source" has been shifted, both as byproduct of corporate involvement and by direct, concerted political action, toward those views their singleton business models favor.  Permissive, not copyleft, and certainly not the [scary kind](https://paritylicense.com).  Not just code, but docs, guides, scripts, the kitchen sink, unless it's under NDA.  Not just a license, but governance, meetings, foundations, and codes of conduct, but HR-friendly ones, and nothing radical.  Enforcement, but [not the kind that hurts](https://www.fsf.org/licensing/enforcement-principles), and [check your teeth at the door](https://gplcc.github.io/gplcc/).

Winners' history leaves us asking:  Was the moral foundation of free software, before open source coopted it, really so narrow?  I find that hard to believe.  But it's a question of purely historical significance now.  What open source will mean, and whether we will continue to pretend that it has innate moral character, as we once believed the Internet could only do good, is a question of the future and present experience, not the past.
