---
title: Forward and Back
description: giving software for granted, and its discontents
layout: post
---

A cliche keeps ringing in my ears: _taken for granted_.  A lot of independent open source contributors feel taken for granted.  Of course they do.

In cold, pragmatic terms, posting code on the web says _take it_.  Slapping [MIT](https://spdx.org/licenses/MIT), [BSD](https://spdx.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause), or a similar permissive license on the code says _granted_.  Contributors feel taken for granted.  But many are giving their work away to be taken, and granting all the permission they can for it.

Not just coders.  The thing we call _open source_ eats all kinds of contributions.  Documentation.  Submission guidelines.  Writing on public mailing lists, chat channels, and bug trackers.  Mission statements.  Governance documents.  Hours and hours of real effort, distilled to prose, code, data, and institutions, then taken for granted by others.  Because it is.

Once you've given work for granted, it's hard to go back and bargain for more of anything, especially money.  You find yourself asking something---cash, help, opportunity---for nothing, which is what your work costs, once you've given it away.  When you ask, even many who may praised, recognized, and paid you before aren't moved to action by your track record.  Their memories seem to cut short.  Another cliche seems to ring in their ears: _What have you done for me lately?_

I've met so many open source people facing this wall.  Maintainers looking back on years of useful, popular contributions at great personal expense, wondering how to catch up after investing so much on others' behalf.  Contributors looking at what they've been able to do so far, knowing they're uniquely positioned to do so much more, but doing less, so ends continue to meet.  People finding that, per the prevailing wisdom, the answer to open source sustainability is writing proprietary software, or peddling proprietary knowledge, or flexing political muscle, or going into marketing.  People finding that, per Economics 101, public goods like open source always come with free-rider problems, and the winners take more rides than they give.

In these broad, simplistic strokes, the choice appears stark.  You can't look back to open source software you've already released for sustenance.  That's given, and enthusiastically taken, for granted.  So accept that your path to a reasonable income will be almost entirely forward-looking.  Run the contractor gauntlet, perpetually [selling what new open source you can make tomorrow](https://switchmode.github.io), pointing back to yesterday's work only to tip the scales in favor of a higher rate or better opportunity, until you've saved your way to financial security.  Or compensate for open source's lack of rear-view mirrors by contributing to proprietary software, whose whole aspiration is paying tomorrow for work that's already done.  Or do both.  But accept that while open source may be technically superior, it's financially hobbled, unable to fend for itself.

That's a false choice, borne of a definition of open source that defies history and a simplistic, black-and-white view of how software gets made and shared.  Open and closed is a continuum.  Proprietary and permissive is another.  Centralized and decentralized development is still another.  There are more.  Maximally permissive open source software developed by a large, flat, decentralized team of volunteers is not the only kind of open source software, the only sustainable kind, or even the kind with the best sustainability track record.

Closed, proprietary software developed by centralized, hierarchical teams makes a lot of money.  An open source project in search of financial support would do well to welcome contribution out of those revenue streams.  But an open source project need not transform into a stereotypical proprietary project, or pair up with one as "open core" or loss leader, to reap the benefits of both forward- and backward-looking financial opportunity.  License Zero, particularly with the [reciprocal license option](https://licensezero.com/licenses/reciprocal), demonstrates that software can take the friction out earning money in direct relation to the value of past open source contributions.  Open source can be given to everyone, but not granted to those who can't or won't give back, either in kind or in coin.  That creates an opportunity to make money from proprietary software without becoming an open source software developer.
