---
title: Then What?
description: from recognition to change for indie open devs
layout: post
---

Good writing on open source inequity gains power speaking truth to hype. It corroborates the difficult lived experiences of open source developers in ways open source myth and open source theory do not. But in the end, whether that power motivates any lasting change is down to open source developers. Not those who write about them.

Witness: If making open source is hard on you, that doesn't automatically mean you're weak, crazy, ungrateful, or doing it wrong. Even when performed exactly as any particular best-practitioner prescribes---you'll have to pick one, since they disagree---open source is unfair to a great many people. Especially to independent developers. Perhaps to you.

How did reading that paragraph make you feel? Did it stir your conscience, as a consumer of others' work? Did it embolden you to assert yourself, as an open source developer? Did you read your own specific experiences---abusive comments, lazy patches, no fiscal support, dearth of recognition---into its generalities?

Good muckraking does that. Juxtaposing preconception with harsh reality begs reform. But muckraking doesn't tell you what to do next.

Some muckrakers do. Inasmuch, they go beyond reporting, to become activists, entrepreneurs, and theoreticians. To speak with authority, they have to start from the common place: validating thoughts and feelings you share, by revealing your point of view to a broader audience. But what comes next, the specific call to action, derives from the proponent's experience, and not necessarily from yours. It reflects how they see the world, and the tools at their disposal. It reflects their politics and personal style. It reflects where they come from, who they know, and where they're comfortable.

Consider this blog, and License Zero more generally. Manifestly unjust experiences, first- and second-hand, motivate this project. I've sketched some of them, as at the top of [_Mercenary Rapport_](https://blog.licensezero.com/2017/10/16/mercenary-rapport.html). I could tell many more. But License Zero reflects not just the open source environment we share, but my specific path through it.

Licensing is a tool in my hands. Likewise CLIs and minimalist web APIs. I got my dev legs in indie work and contracting. Day-to-day, I work with open source companies, independent developers, and startups, selling products and services into larger enterprises and online. But I keep faith in open collaborative models' ability to challenge traditional firms in key areas. That ideology brought me into software, when I was yet a child.

It is entirely possible to serve a long career in software, even specifically open source software, without sharing any of those points in common with me. Contribution policies, not licenses. Native GUI and embedded apps, not web or CLI. Hired by a public company out of college. Permissive-license supremacy. And so on.

So setting aside everything I've written about how open source is now, does License Zero make sense, as a way that it could be? Does it put the problem posed by your open source experience correctly? Does it strike at the root of that problem? Does it respect open source history, and the diversity of motivations and work styles involved? Does it approach its own financial future responsibly and consistently? Would it reinforce positive dynamics in the community? Would it scale to the size of open source today? Would it tend to steer the meaning of "open source" toward solid land?

I believe those are the right kinds of questions for License Zero, and for every approach to getting open source developers paid, because those are the right kinds of questions for independent open source contributors currently feeling pain. In the same way muckrakers of open source relate contributors' experiences, License Zero and parallel projects ought to succeed by doing the kind of work contributors would do for themselves, with a clean shot at the problem. They ought to be [hackable and reusable](https://github.com/licensezero/). They ought to [show their work](https://blog.licensezer.com). They ought to own, not elide, the unavoidable way decisions get made on views and experiences that aren't universal in open source.

That being said, there is no such thing as perfect certainty on any of the questions posed by open source inequity, or any candidate solutions. The problem space is not so discreet, and won't be solved as proofs are solved, by discovery of a universally sound, verifiable path to the desired result. Instead, there is a practical tension: the urgency of the need for change against our certainty in how to achieve it. Individual open source developers will take the leap and try new methods according to their personal situations. Some out of desperation. Some out of special concern for the problem, and a feeling of greater need to act now. Some will invest in particular approaches, and gain the confidence to adopt early, and then to push. Some will simply wait and see, responding to the inequity in open source today only as users of approaches created and pioneered for them by others.

Fortunately, open source thrives on diversity and low-stakes wagers. New practices build like tides, each of many small contributors following gravity and the pull of their peers. We are in a messy, chaotic exposition phase now, with no deep channels for independent work funding. Hopefully, that will change. Thankfully, it needn't change by sudden, dramatic, high-stakes reversals. This is the part where little experiments can have enormous, outsize impact. If inequity for independent developers is a problem that matters to you, there's arguably no better time than now to do something, or several things, about it.

In the current environment of near universal acclaim for open source consumption, producer-side realism is heresy. Facts permitting, we'd all choose to believe that open source is inherently fair, revolutionary, set apart from industry and commercial concerns. Some facts do not, and those facts irk the faithful.

There is unavoidable drama in any overdue confrontation with reality. Any solution to independent developer compensation will have to rankle twice: once in requiring more of open source consumers, second in addressing a problem most consumers don't see to begin with, or outright deny, on the basis of old myths and theories of open source that accord perfectly well with their own, limited experience.