---
title: Twin Coalitions
layout: post
---

We are witnessing the rebirth of a forgotten coalition in open software, older than the term "open source" itself: activist hackers and upstart businesspeople.  Strange bedfellows.  But they share an interest in rattling the status quo of the software industry, not reinforcing it.  They unite around radical copyleft licensing as a defensive weapon to protect their insurgencies.  They need terms that make "free for open software" mean what it says, legally and practically.

So does the history of its twin, the natural coalition of BSD-school, anti-IP hackers and established software companies.  These equally strange bedfellows share an interest in eliminating transaction costs: legal review of terms, compatibility issues, and enforcement actions.  They unite around permissive licensing, an equally radical legal tool, as a means to [reverse their way out of the defaults of intellectual property law](https://oss.kemitchell.com/#operating-environment).  The permissive coalition needs license terms that make "free for whatever you want" mean what it says, legally and practically.

Recent history is not so balanced.  The permissive coalition has held the spotlight for the past decade.  That's testament to the success of the movement that coined "open source", and its goal of widespread enterprise adoption.

The open source movement jettisoned the radical rhetoric and lefty stylings of the copyleft coalition's activist arm, embodied by Richard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation, and filled the void with the loose economic rhetoric and libertarian stylings of Eric Raymond and the Open Source Initiative.  But the open source movement could not, and did not, jettison the copyleft coalition's business constituency.  Quite the opposite:  It had to court it, split it away from radical hackerdom, if possible.  After all, the vast majority of businesses are small, and managers at smaller firms have more discretion to OK radical departures from received business wisdom, as was open source at the time.  Open source could and did secure its foothold in smaller organizations.

As a consequence, the open source movement couldn't cast aside the licenses that served the business arm of the copyleft coalition, as producers of new software or consumers of important projects, either.  Even though they were [decked out in the very activist trappings open source was trying to cast off](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html#preamble).  Early in its life, the Open Source Initiative approved [functional copyleft alternatives without the rhetoric](https://opensource.org/licenses/Sleepycat).  It went still further, approving stronger copyleft licenses than those drafted by the activist FSF, drafted purposefully as defensive tools for open leaning software companies.  So with [Plan 9](https://opensource.org/licenses/Plan9), the [Reciprocal Public License](https://opensource.org/licenses/RPL-1.5), and [Open Watcom](https://opensource.org/licenses/Watcom-1.0), all circa 2002, all of which the Free Software Foundation _rejected_ for reasons that resonated with some activist hackers, but not their upstart business bedfellows.  That split was partially mended when both organizations approved the [GNU Affero GPL](https://opensource.org/licenses/Watcom-1.0), a license originally written for a business plan to get activist-type hackers paid, amidst incredible controversy, despite OSI having previously approved [OSL](https://opensource.org/licenses/OSL-3.0), a stronger copyleft license written by its own counsel.  By then, the political environment had begun to change.