---
title: Withholding
description: open source doesn't have to mean less
layout: post
---

In [Fulcrums](https://blog.licensezero.com/2018/03/04/fulcrums.html), I laid out a way to think about the leverage independent open source maintainers have to get the financial compensation they need.  It's fundamentally a descriptive framework, a mental model, my mental model.  But that mental model also works as a game plan, a checklist of dimensions along which developers could shrink the meaning of "open source".  If open source shrinks, the scope of developer responsibility shrinks, and the job becomes easier to do in a healthy way.  Maybe even sustainable.

Swamped with GitHub issues?  [Stop offering free support, and demand compensation for it, instead.](https://hueniverse.com/a-new-social-contract-for-open-source-86d1fcf3e353)  Struggling to update tutorials?  Take them down, and start selling books and workshops.  Can't fund the time to work on your project?  Stop doing free work, and only push commits when someone [pays you to do so](https://github.com/switchmode/switchmode).

I could put any number of initiatives, tools, and companies within the _Fulcrums_ taxonomy, based on what part of "open source" they withhold from the commons, and monetize.  If you don't believe that charity---Patreon, Liberapay, personal donation pages---offers a scalable, equitable solution, you're left with slicing bits off the all-inclusive package called "open source" and charging for them.  You're talking about value developers can _withhold_ from open source to drive a bargain for comp that enables them to keep doing the rest for free.

I don't like this picture.  I don't like how it will affect [kids](https://blog.licensezero.com/2017/09/12/manifesto.html#people) and the poor, who only get the full open source package now because it's all free.  I don't like how it will affect freedom to express [correctness](https://github.com/mikeal/r2), [aesthetic](http://browserify.org/) [sensibility](http://backbonejs.org/docs/backbone.html), and [completionism](https://github.com/chalk/chalk/commit/12d1276b36cc026ecea1bdfe1771198b242f7b1d) in the projects developers want to be proud of.  I don't like where advertising-based business models have led, and [I don't want that for programmingdom](https://github.com/atom-minimap/minimap/issues/588).  I don't like how it goes against the grain of open source development methodology, the belief that open process and open output make better process and better output.  I don't like how it goes against the grain of free software as a means of making a world where more systems we use and rely on are transparent and malleable.

The good news of License Zero is that one of the fulcrums of developer leverage, licensing, is fundamentally different from the others.  Withholding and selling permission to use your open source work in commercial and proprietary ways is better than withholding and selling user convenience, advertising, or the freedom to direct your own work.  It's better for individual contributors, and it's better at scale.

We want independent developers to do as much of the best work they can as possible.  And we want independent developers to earn compensation that enables them to live healthy, autonomous lives, and develop their craft.  Selling licenses for commercial and proprietary use of software rewards volume, quality, and refinement of contributor work.  When the wedge is a [reciprocal license](https://licensezero.com/licenses/reciprocal), it rewards businesses making open source.  It fundamentally ties financial incentives to open software, the output we want.

Infrastructure for selling professional services around open source rewards good service.  Infrastructure for selling training rewards good training.  Infrastructure for selling speaking engagements rewards good speaking.  Infrastructure for selling advertising rewards good marketing, charisma, and networking.  These talents may coincide with making good software, but when they coincide, they compete with it:  Doing more of what pays takes time from what we want to encourage.  But selling licenses to use and build with good software rewards good software development.  There's no rivalry for time.  Goals and comp align.

["Open Source" started with licensing](https://opensource.org/osd) for a reason.    That's where developer power is.  Like many, I believe that modern intellectual property laws, especially copyright, go too far as applied to software.  To recite the orthodox economics, governments sought to avoid underproduction of useful creative work by making it [excludable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excludability), or giving creators the power to control who could copy and therefore benefit from their work, and to sell permission.  Intellectual property was the government response to a class of social problems that now include open source sustainability.  They overshot.  Imposing copyright on nearly all software also imposed the transaction costs of copyright licensing on nearly all software users.  The permissive language of open source licenses reacted to overcompensation in the law by foregoing license compensation in exchange for reduced transaction costs.  That trade-off, plus Internet, made incredible software rivaling proprietary projects.

The MIT and BSD licenses, written to release projects from academia, written by folks on funding, were maximally permissive licenses.  But the movement that began as "Free Software" and became "Open Source" started with GPL, the first copyleft license.  ["Free Software" withheld universal permission, imposing conditions instead, for good reasons.](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-even-more-important.html)  Some were very individual.  Copyleft ensured downstream users wouldn't lose the freedoms they'd been granted by original developers.  But some were broad-ranging.  In aggregate, an expanding network of copyleft software would make more and more new software free, creating a world in which most software that matters to people would become free.

License Zero, and dual-licensing based models more generally,
